docs: :memo: update software design landing page (#197)
seedcase-project/design: software/index.qmd

Reviewer: Maybe the values and principles should have their own page? This is a bit text heavy for a “landing page” for my taste :grin:

Reviewer: Exactly my thought—that the landing page should be referring to/give an overview of the rest of the pages 👍

---
title: "Software"
---

These pages describe our software design, specifically on what the
software will look like in the end and on the overall approach to
developing software.

## Values

{{< include /includes/_values-preamble.qmd >}}

Our values, or things we believe in, direct and shape how we build our

> software.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
software. They are as follows: 
```
Or something to connect to the list below.

-   Developing software with inclusivity and accessibility in mind
    produces better, more usable software.

-   Software that is open source and uses open source tools are better
    in the long term and more likely to be used.

-   Documentation is as important as the software itself.

-   High-quality code, though partially subjective, is as important and
    valuable as software that works.

-   Transparent and clear software is easier to reason about, build, and
    use.

-   Simplicity requires more effort but makes better software.

-   Software that is built with a consideration of sustainability in the

>     broad sense, lasts longer and is easier to build and maintain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    broad sense lasts longer and is easier to build and maintain.
```

-   Building software with these values makes it easier to build as a
    team and with collaborators.

## Principles

The guiding principles below are those shaped and informed by the core

> values:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
values.
```

### Wherever possible, re-use existing and openly licensed material

> Software that isn't open source is by definition not transparent, FAIR,
> or open and conflicts with our values, so we aim to use open source
> software as the basis for our software and products. In the open source

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Software that isn't open source is by definition not transparent, FAIR,
or open and conflicts with our values. Therefore, we aim to use open source
software as the basis for our software and products. In the open source
```
Just so the sentence becomes a bit shorter/simpler

software world, there exists many great tools, methods, frameworks, and

> resources used widely in industry but that haven't been incorporated

Reviewer: ```suggestion
resources used widely in industry that haven't been incorporated
```

into common research data practices. Combined with being open source, a
more widely used tool or method means that more people are or have
examined its codebase. As more people examine the code, there is a
higher likelihood that issues are found and fixed faster. So we aim to

> make use of and/or modify these software and resources for our projects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
make use of and/or modify open software and resources for our projects wherever possible.
```

> ### Build using tools that familiar to or used by both specialists and non-specialists

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Build using tools that are familiar to or used by both specialists and non-specialists
```

For highly technical, specialist people like software engineers or other
full-time IT professionals, there is a rich ecosystem of tools to use
for nearly any purpose. However, non-specialist but still technically
knowledgeable people may not have the same resources or knowledge to use
these tools. We want to build software and products in a way that
encourages more contributions from outsiders, which can help us maintain
and develop our products while also (hopefully) leading to greater use.
At the same time, we want to keep it balanced so that we use tools that
specialists (including ourselves), like research software engineers,
data engineers, and data scientists use to be productive and effective
when developing software. So we aim use tools and knowledge that as wide
a variety as possible of potential contributors are at least familiar

> with or soon to be familiar with when building our products.

Reviewer: I found this section a bit hard to follow (even though I understand what is meant bc I’ve read the principles before). Maybe consider rewriting it a bit?

> For highly technical, specialists like software engineers or other
> full-time IT professionals, there is a rich ecosystem of tools to use
> for nearly any purpose. However, technically knowledgable non-specialists
> may not have the same resources or knowledge to use
> these tools. We want to build software and products in a way that
> encourages more contributions from people outside our team, which can help us maintain
> and develop our products while also (hopefully) leading to greater use.
> At the same time, we want to keep it balanced so that we use tools that
> specialists (including ourselves), like research software engineers,
> data engineers, and data scientists use to be productive and effective
> when developing software. So we aim use tools and knowledge that have as wide
> a variety as possible of potential contributors are at least familiar
> with or soon to be familiar with when building our products.

Author: ```suggestion
For highly technical specialists like software engineers or other
full-time IT professionals, there is a rich ecosystem of tools they can draw on and use
for nearly any purpose. However, technically knowledgeable non-specialists
may not have the same resources or knowledge to know how to use
these tools. We want to build software and products in a way that
encourages more contributions from people outside our team, which can help us maintain
and develop our products while also (hopefully) leading to greater use.
So we aim use tools and knowledge that as many 
potential contributors and future team members are at least familiar
with or soon to be familiar with when building our products.
At the same time, we will also embrace and seek out less established or newer tools
that are a substantial improvement over existing or more widely used tools.
That way we can balance being accessible, while also being as productive and 
effective as we can given our resources, time, and knowledge.
```
@signekb what about this?

Reviewer: Love it 👍

### Use and build software that integrates easily with other software

Software that can be easily integrated with other software is more
likely to be used and maintained. When it is more easily integrated with
other systems, it also likely means that it has a good design, such as
being modular, well-documented, and using established conventions. We
aim to design and build software:

-   That can be used in a variety of contexts, with a range of other
    systems.
-   That fits well into our own and others' software ecosystems and
    workflows.

By following many of the principles in this page, we will already have
achieved this. What this means is that we will likely build smaller,
focused software packages that each can connect well together into a
larger ecosystem.

> ### Prefer using software that has characteristics of stability and reliability

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Use software that has characteristics of stability and reliability
```

-   Prefer using tools made by organisations that align with our values.
-   Use tools that have a strong history of stability and reliability to
    minimise the risk of having to refactor or change our processes too
    often.
-   Use tools that are designed and built in a way that makes switching
    to other tools easier (e.g. more interoperable).

However, this aim does not mean we won't be looking for and willing to
use new tools or technologies that are substantially better than the
tools we are currently using.

### Build software that can be used in diverse computing environments

Not all institutions or companies have the funding or access to more
powerful computing environments. Nor do many data needs depend on using
a server for legal or privacy reasons. Some groups may be easily able to
have their data be locally or be put up on popular hosting services like
GitHub or [Zenodo](https://zenodo.org/). To be equitable and inclusive,
we aim to design and build for computing environments with less powerful
read/write speeds, limits in memory and storage, local rather than
remote/server environments, lower Internet access and connectivity, and

> in different operating systems.

Reviewer: This sounds more like a principle of “building for computing environments with less pwoer/speed/memory/storage” than “diverse”?

> ### Prefer building software that is code-based rather than GUI-based

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Build software that is code-based rather than GUI-based
```

Building software with a graphical user interface (GUI) requires
extensive expertise, such as UI/UX knowledge, frontend development, and
effective API design. GUI's also require more maintenance and are more

> likely to have bugs because they can be harder to test, nor are they as
> powerful and flexible as code-based interfaces. So, following our

Reviewer: ```suggestion
likely to have bugs because they can be harder to test. They also aren’t as
powerful and flexible as code-based interfaces. So, following our
```

[principle](/organisation/contribution.qmd) of building for us first, we
aim to build software that is code-based, such as a Python packages or

> command-line interface.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
command-line interfaces.
```

others, which means depending on others' work. But, the more
dependencies we rely on, the higher the risk of a security breach or
vulnerability happening with one of them. So we aim to:

-   Keep the number of dependencies to a minimum, to keep risk exposure
    low.
-   Use popular and established software as dependencies. A larger
    user-base will mean that the dependency has more exposure to
    different use cases, more opportunity to identify and fix issues,
    and more people examining the code.
-   Be very careful when selecting a software to make as a dependency.
    Use our principles as a guide to help us decide and write [decision
    posts](https://decisions.seedcase-project.org) to document our
    rationale and make informed decisions.

### Develop content closer to where it is used or relevant

The further apart related content is from each other, the higher chance
that there will be drift between them. In the context of software, what
this means is that when documentation related to a piece of code is in
another file or folder, the less likely developers will remember to keep
the two updated. So documentation on the code is written in the same

> file as the code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
file as the code itself.
```

This also applies to design documentation and how-to guides. When they
are in another repository, they are less likely to be updated with
changes in the software (and vice versa). So we aim to keep related
content as close as possible to each other. Anything related to a
software product will be found within the same repository.

### Prioritise and seek out simplicity in all aspects of developing software

Simplicity comes in many forms and is much hard to design and build than
complex software. For instance, we aim to:

-   Favour simple packaging over more complex ones, for instance,
    building Python packages instead of Docker images.
-   Use simpler, less nested folder structures and hierarchies.
-   Build smaller, more focused packages instead of larger more complex
    ones with more features.
-   Write simpler, clearer interfaces (like functions) with clear
    actions, inputs, outputs, and without side-effects.
-   Build smaller functions that chain together to build larger ones.
-   Use fewer and simpler programming data structures.

> ### Prefer using a functional programming paradigm

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Use a functional programming paradigm
```

[Functional
programming](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Functional_programming) tends

> to be easier to reason about, develop, and importantly test. This is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to be easier to reason about, develop, and most importantly test. This is
```
Maybe?

title: "Software"
---

These Software design documents describe our overall software design,
specifically on how the software will generally look like in the end and

> our general approach to how we build and develop it. The documents
> include (so far) our values towards software design, which are described
> below, and [principles](principles.qmd), which are informed by our
> values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
our general approach to how we build and develop it. 

So far, these documents include our values towards software design, described
below, and [principles](principles.qmd), which are informed by our
values.
```
```suggestion
our general approach to how we build and develop it. The documents
include (so far) our values towards software design, which are described
below, and [principles](principles.qmd), which are informed by our
values.
```
